GNUstep makefile package
************************

Here is some introductory info to get you started:

What is the GNUstep makefile package?
=====================================

The makefile package is a simple, powerful and extensible way to write
makefiles for a GNUstep-based project.  It allows the user to write a
project without having to deal with the complex issues associated with
configuration, building, installation, and packaging.  It also allows
the user to easily create cross-compiled binaries.

Information
===========

The file `NEWS' has this packages feature history.

   The files `INSTALL' or `GNUstep-HOWTO' give instructions for
installing the packages. Also see the `machines' documentation and
various machine specific READMEs in the Documentation directory.

   Files in the `Documentation' directory have information on the
design of the Makefile system and how to write your own makefiles that
work with it.

License
=======

The GNUstep libraries are covered under the GNU Lesser Public License.
This means you can use these libraries in any program (even non-free
programs). If you distribute the libraries along with your program, you
must make the improvements you have made to the libraries freely
available. You should read the COPYING.LIB file for more information.

   GNUstep tools, test programs, and other files are covered under the
GNU General Public License. The GNU GPL is a free software license,
which requires that all the released improved versions be free software
as well.  You should read the COPYING file for more information.

   The GNUstep make package is licensed under the GNU GPL.

History
=======

The GNUstep makefile package was designed by Scott Christley and Ovidiu
Predescu.

   Flags for building shared libraries and bundles on several systems
were originally identified by Mircea Oancea <mircea@pathcom.com>.

   Richard Frith-Macdonald <richard@brainstorm.co.uk> also contributed
with ideas.

   Nicola Pero <nicola@brainstorm.co.uk> rewrote much of the rule
procedures to increase the speed of the package by over a factor of 7.
He also rewrote much of the rest of the system to make it simpler and
more effective.

How can you help?
=================

   * Give us feedback!  Tell us what you like; tell us what you think
     could be better.  Send bug reports to <bug-gnustep@gnu.org>.


