@c -*-texinfo-*-
@ifclear ANNOUNCE-ONLY
@chapter NEWS

@ifset TEXT-ONLY
@include version.texi
@end ifset

The currently released version is @samp{@value{GNUSTEP-MAKE-VERSION}}.
@end ifclear

@section Changes in version @samp{1.13.0}

Debug libraries now have the same name as normal libraries (i.e. no "_d"
suffix). This reduces the possiblity of multiple libraries being loaded
into the same executable.

Added dragonfly OS to make targets.

Spaces and backslashes are no longer allowed in paths used by the make
package (e.g. with Windows OS). The libraries can still use native paths.

@ifclear ANNOUNCE-ONLY

@section Changes in version @samp{1.12.0}

Minor fixes.

@section Changes in version @samp{1.11.2}

The @file{GNUstep.conf} file is now viewed as the essential
determination of the install location for GNUstep libraries, tools and
other files. During configuration, this file is read, if it exists, to
determine this information. This can still be overriden with
environment and command line options, however. See the filesystem
documentation in the GNUstep Make Documentation directory for more
information.

You no longer need to source GNUstep.sh in order to compile GNUstep
programs. All that is needed is the definition of
GNUSTEP_MAKEFILES. You should also have the GNUstep system tools
directory in your path.

All netbsd systems are assumed to use ELF libraries. Support for the old
static libs version of netbsd was removed.

Serveral new options were added to configure to change the location of
basic dir locations and basic configuration files. Also, the help was
greatly improved. Note that --prefix=/usr/GNUstep/System no longer
works.  Please use --prefix=/usr/GNUstep or
--with-system-root=/usr/GNUstep/System.

A few more fixes for cygwin are included as well as Windows resource rules.

Support for ObjC++ has been added. You should list the ObjC++ .mm
files in the xxx_OBJCC_FILES variable, and put extra ObjC++ flags in
xxx_OBJCCFLAGS or ADDITIONAL_OBJCCFLAGS.

@section Changes in version @samp{1.11.1}

Part of the previous change was reversed. Now libobjc is still linked
with individual applications (as well as the base library), since some
operating systems require this to resolve external symbols. However,
there is no need to recompile all applications again.

Compilation of GNUstep on cygwin was revampled and fixed due to a lot of
work by Tom MacSween.

@section Changes in version @samp{1.11.0}

NOTE: The libobjc library is now linked in with the base library and NOT with
individual applications or tools (except on MingW). This requires that
you do a complete rebuild of all libraries, tools and apps when switching
to this new version.

@itemize @bullet

@item New rules for building and using DLLs were implemented. Now gcc
and other tricks are used to properly export symbols, so no .def file
should be needed. 

@item The GNUsteprc file in $GNUSTEP_SYSTEM_ROOT is deprecated. See the
new GNUstep.conf file (which is not installed by default).

@item Psuedo-framwork support was implemented on MingW. This essentially
involves copying the framework to several places so it can be used without
links, which Windows does not really support.  There's no other 
clean way to do it.

@item Support for xxx_WINDRES_FILES on MinGW was implemented.

@end itemize

@section Changes in version @samp{1.10.0}

@itemize @bullet
@item a GNUsteprc file is now automatically created and installed in
$GNUSTEP_SYSTEM_ROOT, which sets the system-wide default for the user
root directory (default=~/GNUstep, which can be overriden with the
@code{--with-user-root} argument to configure, or by modifying GNUsteprc
after configuration.)
@item make_services is not run by GNUstep.sh anymore. You must run this
manually now (see the gnustep-gui documentation).
@item Palettes use a plist instead of a strings format file now for the
palette.table file.
@item You can use the @code{--enable-native-objc-exceptions} argument to
configure to enable use of built in objc exceptions with compilers that 
support it.
@end itemize

@section Changes in version @samp{1.9.2}

@itemize @bullet
@item Application and Bundles use the latest convention on Apple.
@item Improve/Simplify dependency checking when making docs
@end itemize

@section Changes in version @samp{1.9.1}

@itemize @bullet
@item Remove @code{--disable-import} option
@item README.Darwin for darwin/MacOSX install
@item Framework version and naming clarified.
@end itemize

@section Changes in version @samp{1.9.0}

@itemize @bullet
@item Support for building in a separate build dir.
@item Add @code{--enable-strip-makefiles} option to configure
@item List of classes in a framework gets written to the plist file.
@end itemize

@section Changes in version @samp{1.8.0}

Read the NEWS file for a complete list of changes since the last stable
release. The major difference from 1.6.0 is that the locations of certain
directories have changed. Generally this will not cause a problem unless
your GNUstep directory is shared by multiple machines running this and
earlier (1.6.x) versions of the software.

@section Changes in version @samp{1.7.4}

Bug fixes.

@section Changes in version @samp{1.7.3}

@itemize @bullet
@item Adds library combo to Headers directory if not flattened.
@item Add Markup file (Renaissance) support.
@end itemize

@section Changes in version @samp{1.7.2}

--enable-flattened (Flat directory structure) is on by default.

@itemize @bullet
@item On WIN32 use HOMEPATH in preference to USERPROFILE
@item netbsd and openbsd compile fixes.
@end itemize

@section Changes in version @samp{1.7.1}

Bug fixes.

@section Changes in version @samp{1.7.0}

This version contains a major change in the location of certain
directories and installed files as detailed in the @file{filesystem.texi}
document. When installing this version for the first time, all old
directories and files in those directories will be moved to the new 
locations automatically. However, you should update all GNUstep versions
on any machine you have them installed on in order to avoid any
incompatibilities.

Other changes:

@itemize @bullet
@item Support for preprocessed Info.plists.
@end itemize

@section Changes in version @samp{1.6.0}

Make now configures by default for only one system. To compile and run
GNUstep for multiple platforms from the same directory, use the
configure argument --enable-multi-platform.

@itemize @bullet
@item Auto-build def file for DLLs
@item Work natively on MacOSX systems. Now use apple-apple-apple
instead of nx-nx-nx on OSX systems.
@item More efficient checks for re-making a project.
@end itemize

@section Changes in version @samp{1.5.1}

@itemize @bullet
@item Framework support rewritten, also supports multiple names.
@item API change: Replace frameowork's xxx_TOOLS by xxx_COPY_INTO_DIR.
@item Unified link commands between libraries and frameworks (LIB_LINK_*).
@item New 'make strings' target for localization support.
@item Speed improvements.
@item Doesn't try to build OSX bundle on GNUstep and vice versa.
@item API change: Tools/Subproj can have resources.
@item API change: TOOL_INSTALL_DIR.
@end itemize

@section Changes in version @samp{1.5.0}

@itemize @bullet
@item Add NetBSD Elf support
@end itemize

@section Changes in version @samp{1.4.0}

@itemize @bullet
@item Update Darwin/GNU gcc and Irix targets
@end itemize

@section Changes in version @samp{1.3.4}

This is a first prerelease version for 1.4.

@itemize @bullet
@item Use gnugc-gnu-gnu library combo for garbage collecting version.
@item Add support for --library-combo in opentool
@item Change GNUSTEP_PATHPREFIX_LIST to	GNUSTEP_PATHLIST 
@item Add verbosity levels. Use make messages=yes for full messages.
@end itemize

@section Changes in version @samp{1.3.3}

@itemize @bullet
@item Recognizes XXX_STANDARD_INSTALL=no to not do installation.
@item Updated instructions for MingW/MSYS installation.
@end itemize

@section Changes in version @samp{1.3.2}

@itemize @bullet
@item Instructions for building on Windows with MSYS
@item Resolve library dependencies better on Windows
@item Fix frameworks in RPMs and DEBs
@item Continued reorganization.
@end itemize

@section Changes in version @samp{1.3.0}

The package has gone through an extensive reorganization to break up
each sub-make into two separate components. This allows for much
simplified code and lots of code sharing between components. As a side
effect, it also increased the speed of the code by at least a factor of
2.

@itemize @bullet
@item Force shared=yes for cygwin and mingw
@item Bundles copy resources from subprojects. 
@item Better resource management. Resources handled accross all project types.
@item Simplified and fixed user root location between make and base libraries.
@item Changed Apps directory to Applications
@item Fixes for MacOSX, MingW
@end itemize

@section Changes in version @samp{1.2.1}

@itemize @bullet
@item the source distribution code has been rewritten to be more general
and extended.  Packages built using gnustep-make now automatically
have handy targets building tarballs from sources or from CVS imports.
@item implemented support for auto-dependencies, which means that any object
file automatically depends on all the header files which were used to
build it.  Only works with newer compilers.
@item implemented INSTALL_AS_USER and INSTALL_AS_GROUP.
@item implemented a strip=yes option.
@item various bug fixes and minor improvements.
@end itemize

@section Changes in version @samp{1.2.0}

@itemize @bullet
@item The core rules and internals of gnustep-make have been fundamentally
redesigned and rewritten.  notably, gnustep-make now works using only
a single recursive sub-make invocation rather than two, which makes
it consistently faster and simpler in all circumstances.
@item The clean rules have been heavily optimized - they no longer use 
recursive sub-make invocations at all and so they are really fast.
@item Many improvements to java support. Optimized management of nested classes
@item Better conformance to make conventions.
@item File specific compilation flags 
@item Fixed darwin support
@item Support for C++ files.
@item Made use of library installation dir consistent with other installation.
@item Much improved Windows path support
@end itemize

@section Changes in version @samp{1.0.1}

@itemize @bullet
@item Support for Java tools.
@item Build GUI backend as a bundle (default). 
@item Remove backend part of LIBRARY_COMBO.
@item Fixes to run on FreeBSD, Solaris.
@end itemize

@section Changes in version @samp{1.0.0}

@itemize @bullet
@item Optimizations that in many cases more than double the speed.
@item Added preliminary darwin support.
@item rpm packeing improvements.
@item Better checking for mingw and cygwin
@end itemize

@section Changes in version @samp{0.9.2}

@itemize @bullet
@item HOWTO and faq files moved from core package to here
@item Configurable GNUSTEP_LOCAL_ROOT and GNUSTEP_NETWORK_ROOT
@end itemize

@section Changes in version @samp{0.9.1}

Make has been reoganized so that it only relies on libraries and other things
that are necessary for the Makefile package itself. Any libraries wanting to
add extra package information can do so by installing a make stub in the
@file{Additional} directory. This greatly simplifies compilation and packaging.

@itemize @bullet
@item Javadoc support added.
@item debian directory added for dpkg
@item RPM support rewritten from scratch.
@end itemize

@section Changes in version @samp{0.9.0}

ffcall library is highly recommended for use with the GNUstep base
library. You need to have installed it prior to configuring the Makefile
package. See the INSTALL file.

@itemize @bullet
@item Support for automatically generating RPM spec files.
@item Build suitable files for MacOS bundles
@item Add option for flattened directory structure.
@item LaText documentation support.
@item Added support for Frameworks
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.6.6}

The GNUstep system libraries are now installed in a separate system root
directory (default /usr/GNUstep/System) rather than the GNUstep
root directory (default /usr/GNUstep). You can revert to the old behavior
using a configure option @samp{--without-system-root}. We also recommend
removing any previous GNUstep versions before installing the new one in order
to avoid problems with the system finding the correct binary and/or library.

@itemize @bullet
@item Support for Windows compilation (cygwin and mingw) and DLL creation
and usage.
@item Java support rewritten and extended.
@end itemize

@end ifclear
@c end ifclear ANNOUNCE-ONLY
